---
layout: post
title: "Data visualization"
categories: course/various/
tags: /dataviz/
---

I started to plot data since many years, but only few months ago I really went into
data visualization (or dataviz, if you prefer).
I attended some Coursera course of prof. Enrico Bertini, who also has a very interesting
podcast named [Data Stories](https://datastori.es/) together with Moritz Stefaner.
The course allows you design and decide what is the best data visualization by
starting from what is currently known about our brain's processes in visual perception.

Since I discovered this research field I started reading books talking about this field,
and I began with the ones written written by the data visualization pioneer [Edward Tufte](https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Tufte).

I would like to share some (hopefully intelligent) though about data visualization.
Moreover, as Tufte himself wrote in his book Beautiful Evidence, "as teachers know, a very good way to learn something is to teach it", so let's try.

Before doing so it's better to put here some vocabulary.

A data visualization is first of all made by **markers**, namely the graphical
objects that we use to represent our items.
The most common markers are:
- points
- lines
- bars
- areas

For each item we will represent some quantity, and we will do so by using one or more
**visual channels** like:
- position
- size (length/width/area)
- angle/slope
- color hue
- color intensity
- shape and textures

Other fundamental components of the visualization are the components which allow
us to contextualize and interpret the visualization.
Those components can be geometric components like axes, grids, reference lines
but also textual components such as labels and annotations.

A visual representation is a combination of such components, and you will find a huge variety visual representations,
as there is a potentially infinite number of ways to combine these ingredients.
So how to choose one? Which is the best?

As often happens, there is not **the best** representation, as we already said elsewhere in this blog, there is no silver bullet.
A better question is

> What is the most appropriate way to visualize this aspect of the data?

This of course depends on many factors, and you will often find yourself in a situation where you simply
have to decide how to balance your needs.
Data visualization is the discipline which wants to address to this question from a scientific perspective.

I will try and share some resources about this topic in some future post, as well as to share some hopefully interesting personal thoughts.

<!--
<div id="tester" style="width:900px;height:900px;"></div>
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-latest.min.js"></script>
<script>
	TESTER = document.getElementById('tester');
	Plotly.newPlot( TESTER, [{
	y: ["Albania","Bosnia and Herzegovina","Bulgaria","Croatia","Czechia","Estonia","Hungary","Kosovo","Latvia","Lithuania","North Macedonia","Montenegro","Poland","Romania","Serbia","Slovakia","Slovenia","Armenia","Azerbaijan","Belarus","Georgia","Moldova","Russia","Ukraine","Austria","Belgium","Cyprus","Denmark","Finland","France","Germany","Greece","Iceland","Ireland","Italy","Luxembourg","Malta","Netherlands","Norway","Portugal","Spain","Sweden","Switzerland","United Kingdom"],
	x: [296.6,187.7,1336.5,1341.2,3707.1,753.5,2774.0,108.0,819.5,1656.1,230.9,97.7,16818.9,5161.1,1443.5,2003.0,758.9,634.3,2664.8,792.2,292.7,40.1,71981.1,43983.2,3783.9,7045.0,514.6,5737.7,5089.5,56999.7,57807.7,8347.5,0.0,1207.7,34627.5,585.7,92.4,15670.8,8960.3,3647.6,20979.2,8491.5,6241.2,69998.7],
    type: "bar",
    orientation: "h",
    transforms: [{
    type: 'sort',
    target: 'x',
    order: "ascending"
    }]
    }], {
	margin: { t: 0 } } );
</script>
-->
