---
categories: /statistics/
date: 2025-09-08
description: How to weight evidence from a study
layout: post
section: 5
subcategory: Causal inference
tags: /validity/
title: Validity

---




Each study has its pros and cons, and every study can be performed
in many different ways. Starting from this kind of considerations,
Campbell analyzed the strengths and the problems of many types of studies
and condensed his results in a textbook.

In his textbook, he defined four kinds of validity:

- Statistical conclusion validity
- Internal validity
- External validity
- Construct validity

In the present post, we will try and give an overview of Campbell's classification,
together with his definition of validity.

## Validity

As Campbell does, we use the term validity to refer to an approximate truth
of a proposition. We say that an inference is valid when evidence
supports the claim. When talking about validity, we should always
speak about the validity of a single experiment rather than about
the validity of the experimental design, since each experiment
is unique in terms of planning, execution and analysis.
A claim is not valid if there are reasons to think that
it does not correspond to what we observe, if it's not logically
coherent or if it conflicts with some more grounded knowledge. 

### Statistical conclusion validity

Statistical conclusion validity refers to the correctness of the statistical
conclusions of the study.
The first, obvious threat, to statistical conclusion validity,
is given by errors in the computations.
Of course, one may also apply a method which hase some assumption which is
violated by the data, and also this kind of issues threatens the statistical
conclusion validity.

Another threat to statistical conclusion validity is sampling error
and, more generally, low power.
In the context of statistical tests, sampling errors translates
into type I errors or type II errors. These are however not the only
possible kinds of errors. If we are trying to make an estimate,
a sampling error could result into an M type error (wrong magnitude estimate)
or into an S type error (wrong sign estimate).

Statistical conclusion validity does not only refer to tests
and point estimate, as we could underestimate the uncertainties
of an estimate.


### Internal validity

Internal validity is the validity of the translation of the statistical
conclusions in causal conclusions.
When a study has internal validity, we can use the observed
covariation to draw statistical conclusions.
Randomization is helpful in increasing internal validity,
while observational studies generally lack in internal validity.
Inbetween situations are more subtle, and only a careful evaluation
of the experimental setup by a field expert can assess the
internal validity of the study.
In order to ensure the internal validity of a study, we must
exclude any reasonable cause for the observed covariation
other than the treatment variation.

### External validity

External validity, also named generalizability, refers to the validity
of a causal inference when we generalize to a setup different
from the one of the experiment.
In other terms, when we analyze external validity, we are
trying to check if we can extend the causal conclusions of
the study to different populations, setting, treatment variables or outcome variables.
We should keep in mind that the term generalizability can be misleading,
as external validity is not only about the validity of the inference
to a broader population, but also to a different one.

External validity is not only about populations, but it's about
how does our conclusions apply when we change any relevant
factor such as setup or environment with respect to the one used in the study.
As an example we might question whether we could apply the result
of a clinical study in a specific hospital to a different
hospital or maybe outside from the hospital.

While randomized experiments generally have a high internal validity,
they often lack in external validity, since both the sample
and the experimental setup are highly controlled.
When you design a study, you should balance your resource allocation
between a higher internal validity and a higher external validity.


### Construct validity

The construct validity refers to the validity of the inferences
about the higher order constructs we are analyzing.
When we measure the length of an object, there are little doubts
about the abstract property we are trying to analyze and about
how does this property connects with what it's written on the tape measure.
How to measure the level of anxiety of a person is however much less
obvious, and we may try and use different ways to assess the level
of anxiety of a person.
Different measures might relate to different aspects to what
we call anxiety, and an experiment might allow us to draw conclusions
about some aspects of the abstract construct but any conclusion
on other aspects might be invalid.

## Conclusions

We introduced the concept of validity as well as the different
kinds of validity of a study. From the next post, we will start
looking more concretely at how to realize an experiment.
